In x86_64 assembly language, instructions are composed of different elements such as mnemonics, operands, registers, and addressing modes. Here’s a breakdown of every key term used in assembly language for x86_64 architecture:
1. Mnemonics

A mnemonic is the symbolic name of an assembly instruction, representing the operation to be performed. Some common mnemonics:

    mov: Moves data from one location to another.
        Example: mov rax, rbx (move the contents of rbx into rax).
    add: Adds two operands.
        Example: add rax, 5 (add 5 to the contents of rax).
    sub: Subtracts the second operand from the first.
        Example: sub rax, rbx (subtract rbx from rax).
    mul: Multiplies two operands.
        Example: mul rbx (multiply rax by rbx).
    div: Divides rax by another register, storing the quotient in rax and the remainder in rdx.
        Example: div rbx.
    cmp: Compares two operands.
        Example: cmp rax, rbx (compare rax and rbx).
    jmp: Jumps to a specified address.
        Example: jmp label (jump to the address labeled label).
    call: Calls a subroutine.
        Example: call func (jump to func and push return address onto the stack).
    ret: Returns from a subroutine.
        Example: ret (pop the return address from the stack and jump to it).
    push: Pushes a value onto the stack.
        Example: push rax (push the value in rax onto the stack).
    pop: Pops a value off the stack.
        Example: pop rbx (pop the top value from the stack into rbx).

2. Operands

Operands are the data on which the instructions operate. An instruction typically operates on one, two, or sometimes three operands. The operands can be:

    Registers: Values stored in CPU registers.
        Example: add rax, rbx (both rax and rbx are registers).
    Memory addresses: Values stored at a specific location in memory.
        Example: mov rax, [rbx] (load the value at the memory address pointed to by rbx into rax).
    Immediate values: Literal values hardcoded into the instruction.
        Example: mov rax, 10 (moves the immediate value 10 into rax).

3. Addressing Modes

Addressing modes specify how the operands are accessed. These are the most common addressing modes in x86_64:

    Immediate addressing: The operand is a constant value.
        Example: mov rax, 5 (move the immediate value 5 to rax).
    Register addressing: The operand is a register.
        Example: mov rax, rbx (move the value in rbx to rax).
    Direct addressing: The operand is a memory address.
        Example: mov rax, [0x601050] (move the value at memory address 0x601050 to rax).
    Indirect addressing: The operand is in memory, and the memory address is held in a register.
        Example: mov rax, [rbx] (move the value at the memory address stored in rbx to rax).
    Base-plus-offset addressing: A memory location is addressed as the sum of a base register and an offset.
        Example: mov rax, [rbx+4] (move the value at rbx + 4 into rax).
    Scaled-index addressing: The memory location is computed using a base register, an index register, and a scaling factor (usually for arrays).
        Example: mov rax, [rbx+rcx*4] (move the value at rbx + (rcx * 4) to rax).

4. Registers

Registers are fast, small storage areas in the CPU. There are general-purpose registers and special-purpose registers. Some common registers used in x86_64 instructions include:

    General-purpose registers: rax, rbx, rcx, rdx, rsi, rdi, rbp, rsp, r8 to r15.
        Example: mov rax, rbx (moves the value of rbx into rax).
    Special registers:
        rip (Instruction Pointer): Points to the next instruction to be executed.
        rflags/eflags (Flags Register): Holds status flags from arithmetic operations (e.g., carry, zero, overflow).

5. Instruction Types

There are various types of instructions in x86_64 assembly language, each with its own purpose:

    Data Movement Instructions:
        mov: Moves data between registers or between memory and registers.
        lea: Load Effective Address, used to calculate addresses.
    Arithmetic Instructions:
        add, sub: Perform addition or subtraction.
        mul, div: Multiplication and division.
        inc, dec: Increment and decrement values.
    Logical Instructions:
        and, or, xor: Perform bitwise logical operations.
        not: Perform bitwise negation.
    Control Flow Instructions:
        jmp: Unconditional jump to a label or address.
        call: Call a subroutine and save the return address.
        ret: Return from a subroutine.
        je, jne: Conditional jumps based on flag conditions (e.g., je = jump if equal).
    Stack Operations:
        push, pop: Add or remove values from the stack.
        leave: Clean up the stack before returning from a function.
    String Manipulation Instructions:
        movsb, movsw, movsd: Move strings of bytes, words, or double words.
        stosb, stosw, stosd: Store strings of bytes, words, or double words.

6. Flags

The Flags Register (rflags in x86_64) holds various status flags that are set or cleared based on the result of arithmetic or logical operations. Common flags include:

    ZF (Zero Flag): Set when the result of an operation is zero.
    SF (Sign Flag): Set when the result of an operation is negative.
    CF (Carry Flag): Set when an unsigned overflow occurs in an arithmetic operation.
    OF (Overflow Flag): Set when a signed overflow occurs.
    PF (Parity Flag): Set if the number of 1 bits in the least significant byte of the result is even.
    IF (Interrupt Flag): Controls whether interrupts are enabled.

7. Memory Addressing Terms

Memory addressing refers to how operands are accessed from memory. Key terms include:

    Stack: A LIFO (Last-In-First-Out) data structure used to store function call return addresses, local variables, etc.
        Example: push and pop are used to manipulate the stack.
    Heap: Dynamically allocated memory managed by the operating system.
    Stack Pointer (rsp): Points to the current top of the stack.
    Base Pointer (rbp): Points to the base of the current function's stack frame.
    Effective Address: The final memory address computed in an instruction using registers, offsets, and scaling factors (used in lea and memory instructions).

8. System Instructions

    syscall: Invokes a system call, transferring control to the operating system.
    iretq: Returns from an interrupt handler.

Example of an Instruction in Assembly

asm

mov rax, [rbx+rcx*4] ; Move the value at the address (rbx + rcx * 4) into rax

    Mnemonic: mov (move data)
    Operands:
        rax (destination register)
        [rbx+rcx*4] (source operand: a memory address calculated using indirect addressing and scaling)

Understanding these terms helps to demystify assembly instructions, allowing you to interpret or write assembly code for the x86_64 architecture. Let me know if you need more detail on any specific instructions!
